---
title: "Gestational and lactational exposure to gossypol alters the testis transcriptome"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-01-17-paper-8
excerpt: 'Our findings provide evidence that maternal exposure to gossypol alters male reproductive function in the offspring, with potential lasting or lifelong negative consequences.'
date: 2020-01-17
venue: 'BMC Genomics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-6487-2'
citation: '<font size="3"> Louvandini, H., Corrêa, P. S., Amorín, R., <strong>Liu, L.</strong>, Ieda, E. H., Jimenez, C. R., ... & Peñagaricano, F. (2020). <em>Gestational and lactational exposure to gossypol alters the testis transcriptome.</em> BMC genomics, 21, 1-11. </font>'
---

**Background**
Reproductive capacity can be altered by challenges experienced during critical periods of development, including fetal development and early neonatal life. Gossypol is a polyphenolic compound, commonly found in cotton seeds, that impairs male reproduction. Here, we investigated whether the exposure to gossypol in utero and during lactation alters male reproductive function in sheep. From conception until 60 days postpartum, ewes were randomly assigned to a control diet or a gossypol-rich diet based on cottonseed. Lamb testicles were removed at 60 days of age and subjected to RNA-sequencing.

**Results**
Lambs derived from the maternal cottonseed diet showed significantly lower growth and lower testis weight as a proportion of the total body weight, and reduced testosterone levels. In addition, the testis transcriptome was significantly altered by the maternal cottonseed diet. Most of the altered genes are directly implicated in testis development and sperm biology, cell communication, iron ion metabolism, calcium homeostasis and signaling, among other functions. Interestingly, network analysis revealed that exposure to gossypol significantly disturbed coexpression patterns among spermatogenesis-related genes, suggesting a disruption in coregulation mechanisms.

**Conclusions**
Our findings provide evidence that maternal exposure to gossypol alters male reproductive function in the offspring, with potential lasting or lifelong negative consequences.

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-6487-2){:target="_blank"}