---
title: "Genetic dissection of reproductive performance of dairy cows under heat stress"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-05-03-paper-7
excerpt: 'Overall, our findings contribute to a better understanding of the genetics underlying the reproductive performance of dairy cattle under heat stress conditions and point out novel genomic strategies for improving thermotolerance and fertility via marker-assisted breeding'
date: 2020-05-03
venue: 'Animal Genetics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1111/age.12943'
citation: '<font size="3"> Sigdel, A., <strong>Liu, L.</strong>, Abdollahi‐Arpanahi, R., Aguilar, I., & Peñagaricano, F. (2020). <em>Genetic dissection of reproductive performance of dairy cows under heat stress.</em> Animal Genetics, 51(4), 511-520. </font>'
---

Heat stress negatively impacts the reproductive performance of dairy cows. The main objective of this study was to dissect the genetic basis underlying dairy cow fertility under heat stress conditions. Our first goal was to estimate genetic components of cow conception across lactations considering heat stress. Our second goal was to reveal individual genes and functional gene-sets that explain a cow’s ability to conceive under thermal stress. Data consisted of 74 221 insemination records on 13 704 Holstein cows. Multitrait linear repeatability test-day models with random regressions on a function of temperature–humidity index values were used for the analyses. Heritability estimates for cow conception under heat stress were around 2–3%, whereas genetic correlations between general and thermotolerance additive genetic effects were negative and ranged between −0.35 and −0.82, indicating an unfavorable relationship between cows’ ability to conceive under thermo-neutral vs. thermo-stress conditions. Whole-genome scans identified at least six genomic regions on BTA1, BTA10, BTA11, BTA17, BTA21 and BTA23 associated with conception under thermal stress. These regions harbor candidate genes such as BRWD1, EXD2, ADAM20, EPAS1, TAOK3, and NOS1, which are directly implicated in reproductive functions and cellular response to heat stress. The gene-set enrichment analysis revealed functional terms related to fertilization, developmental biology, heat shock proteins and oxidative stress, among others. Overall, our findings contribute to a better understanding of the genetics underlying the reproductive performance of dairy cattle under heat stress conditions and point out novel genomic strategies for improving thermotolerance and fertility via marker-assisted breeding.

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1111/age.12943){:target="_blank"}

<!-- 
Recommended citation: Your Name, You. (2009). "Paper Title Number 1." <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1). -->