---
title: "Maternal methionine supplementation during gestation alters alternative splicing and DNA methylation in bovine skeletal muscle"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-10-30-paper-3
excerpt: 'Overall, our findings provide evidence that a prenatal diet rich in methyl donors can significantly alter the offspring transcriptome, including changes in isoform expression and exon usage, and some of these changes are mediated by changes in DNA methylation.'
date: 2021-10-30
venue: 'BMC Genomics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-021-08065-4'
citation: '<font size="3"> <strong>Liu, L.</strong>, Amorín, R., Moriel, P., DiLorenzo, N., Lancaster, P. A., & Peñagaricano, F. (2021). <em>Maternal methionine supplementation during gestation alters alternative splicing and DNA methylation in bovine skeletal muscle.</em> BMC genomics, 22, 1-11. </font>'
---

**Background**
The evaluation of alternative splicing, including differential isoform expression and differential exon usage, can provide some insights on the transcriptional changes that occur in response to environmental perturbations. Maternal nutrition is considered a major intrauterine regulator of fetal developmental programming. The objective of this study was to assess potential changes in splicing events in the longissimus dorsi muscle of beef calves gestated under control or methionine-rich diets. RNA sequencing and whole-genome bisulfite sequencing were used to evaluate muscle transcriptome and methylome, respectively.

**Results**
Alternative splicing patterns were significantly altered by maternal methionine supplementation. Most of the altered genes were directly implicated in muscle development, muscle physiology, ATP activities, RNA splicing and DNA methylation, among other functions. Interestingly, there was a significant association between DNA methylation and differential exon usage. Indeed, among the set of genes that showed differential exon usage, significant differences in methylation level were detected between significant and non-significant exons, and between contiguous and non-contiguous introns to significant exons.

**Conclusions**
Overall, our findings provide evidence that a prenatal diet rich in methyl donors can significantly alter the offspring transcriptome, including changes in isoform expression and exon usage, and some of these changes are mediated by changes in DNA methylation.


[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-021-08065-4)