---
title: "Histological and transcriptomic analysis of adipose and muscle of dairy calves supplemented with 5-hydroxytryptophan"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-06-05-paper-5
excerpt: 'Our data highlights tissue specific genes and pathways impacted by increased peripheral serotonin. In the adipose, serotonin impacted the expression of genes involved in pathways related to intracellular signal transduction mechanisms, lipid metabolism and fatty acid biosynthesis, cell proliferation and differentiation'
date: 2021-06-05
venue: 'Scientific Reports'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88443-w'
citation: '<font size="3"> Field, S. L., Marrero, M. G., <strong>Liu, L.</strong>, Peñagaricano, F., & Laporta, J. (2021). <em>Histological and transcriptomic analysis of adipose and muscle of dairy calves supplemented with 5-hydroxytryptophan.</em> Scientific Reports, 11(1), 9665. </font>'
---
In mammals, peripheral serotonin is involved in regulating energy balance. Herein, we characterized the transcriptomic profile and microstructure of adipose and muscle in pre-weaned calves with increased circulating serotonin. Holstein bull calves (21 ± 2 days old) were fed milk replacer supplemented with saline (CON, 8 mL/day n = 4) or 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP, 90 mg/day, n = 4) for 10 consecutive days. Calves were euthanized on d10 to harvest adipose and muscle for RNA-Sequencing and histological analyses. Twenty-two genes were differentially expressed in adipose, and 33 in muscle. Notably, Interferon gamma inducible protein-47 was highly expressed and upregulated in muscle and adipose (avg. log FC = 6.5). Enriched pathways in adipose tissue revealed serotonin’s participation in lipid metabolism and PPAR signaling. In muscle, enriched pathways were related to histone acetyltransferase binding, Jak-STAT signaling, PI3K-Akt signaling and cell proliferation. Supplementation of 5-HTP increased cell proliferation and total cell number in adipose and muscle. Adipocyte surface area was smaller and muscle fiber area was not different in the 5-HTP group. Manipulating the serotonin pathway, through oral supplementation of 5-HTP, influences signaling pathways and cellular processes in adipose and muscle related to endocrine and metabolic functions which might translate into improvements in calf growth and development.

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88443-w)