---
title: "The metabolomic composition of the oviductal fluid is controlled by the periovulatory hormonal context in Bos indicus cows"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-10-17-paper-9
excerpt: "We concluded that the periovulatory endocrine milieu regulates the composition of the oviductal fluid."
date: 2024-10-17
venue: "Biology of Reproduction"
paperurl: "https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28896-3"
citation: '<font size="3"> Angela G, Mariana S, Moana RF, <strong>Liu, L.</strong>, Guilherme P, Edson GLT, Peñagaricano, F & Mario B. (2024). <em>The metabolomic composition of the oviductal fluid is controlled by the periovulatory hormonal context in Bos indicus cows.</em> Biology of Reproduction, ioae153. </font>'
---

In cattle, oviductal function is controlled by the ovarian sex-steroids estradiol and progesterone. Here, we tested the hypothesis that the exposure to contrasting sex-steroid milieus differentially impacts the oviductal fluid composition. Estrous cycles of non-lactating, multiparous Nelore cows were pre-synchronized and then synchronized with a protocol designed two induce ovulation of large or small follciles. Larger preovulatory follicle (day 0) and corpora lutea (day 4) and greater estradiol (day 0) and progesterone (day 4) concentrations were observed in the large follciles group. Four days after induced ovulation, oviductal fluid was collected post-mortem. Quantitative mass spectrometry was used to determine the concentration of amino acids, biogenic amines, acylcarnitines, phosphatidylcholines, lysophosphatidylcholines, sphingomyelins, hexoses, prostaglandins, and related compounds. Multivariate analyses (orthogonal projections to latent structures discriminant analysis) were conducted to compare the metabolomic signatures of oviductal fluids. Correlation network analysis was conducted to measure the strength and hierarchy of associations among metabolites. Of the 205 metabolites quantified, 171 were detected in at least 50% of the samples and were included in further data analysis. After orthogonal projections to latent structures discriminant analysis analysis, samples of the large follciles and small follciles were divided clearly into two non-overlapping clusters. Twenty metabolites had different or tended to have different concentrations in the oviductal fluid when comparing groups. Seven of these 20 analytes had greater concentrations in large follciles cows. Moreover, total sum of biogenic amines, phosphatidylcholines, and prostaglandins were higher in the small follciles group. The correlation network showed that the large follciles group metabolites’ concentrations were highly intercorrelated, which was not observed in the small follciles group. We concluded that the periovulatory endocrine milieu regulates the composition of the oviductal fluid.

[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1093/biolre/ioae153)
